Update proposal / voting documentation (#2877)
dfinity/portal: docs/developer-docs/daos/nns/proposal-lifecycle.mdx

---
keywords: [intermediate, governance, concept, nns]
---

import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

# Proposal lifecycle

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Intermediate", "Governance", "Concept"]} />

A proposal goes through the following lifecycle. First, a proposal is submitted by a governance participants. Then
other governance participants form a decision and vote on the proposal. Based on these votes, the governance canister derives
a proposal decision, i.e., the proposal is either adopted or rejected.
If the proposal is rejects, usually nothing happens. If the proposal is adopted, the agreed on decision is automatically executed
by the governance canister.
Let's look at each stage in the proposal lifecycle in a bit more detail.

## Proposal submission

> Any eligible neuron can make and submit a proposal.
> To avoid being inundated by useless proposals, a user submitting a proposal has to pay a fee of 10 ICP when submitting a proposal,
> that they will receive back if the proposal is adopted (but that they will not receive back if the proposal is rejected).
> 
> After a proposal is submitted, the proposal is created and stored in the governance canister.
> Moreover, the governance canister computes and stores additional information with each proposal.
> First, the governance canister looks at all neurons and creates an (empty) ballot for each eligible neuron that has a
> dissolve delay of at least 6 months. Thereby, each neuron's ballot stores the neuron's voting power in this moment.
> This means that at the time of the proposal's submission a neuron snapshot is taken and all neurons can vote on the proposal
> with the voting power that they have in this moment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any eligible neuron can make and submit a proposal. To avoid being inundated by useless proposals, a user submitting a proposal has to pay a fee of 10 ICP when submitting a proposal, that they will receive back if the proposal is adopted but not receive back if the proposal is rejected.

After a proposal is submitted, the proposal is created and stored in the governance canister. The governance canister computes and stores additional information with each proposal.

First, the governance canister looks at all neurons and creates an empty ballot for each eligible neuron that has a
dissolve delay of at least 6 months, storing the neuron's voting power in this moment. This means that at the time of the proposal's submission, a neuron snapshot is taken and all neurons can vote on the proposal with the voting power that they have at that moment.
```

:::info
This results in the following, potentially unintuitive cases:
* If a neuron is created after a proposal was submitted, it is not eligible to vote on this proposal.
* If a neuron had a dissolve delay of less than 6 months when a proposal was submitted, it cannot vote on the proposal, even if the neuron's dissolve delay is increased again.
* If a neuron had a dissolve delay of 6 months when a proposal was submitted, it can vote on the proposal during the full voting period, even if by the time of voting the neuron's dissolve delay decreased slightly below 6 months.

:::

The sum of all of the neurons' voting powers determines the total voting power associated with a given proposal.

> In addition to creating all ballots, when a new proposal is created, the proposer's ballot is set to a “yes” vote.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to creating all ballots, when a new proposal is created, the proposer's ballot is set to a “Yes” vote.
```

This reflects that the proposal already has the support of the user submitting it.

> Moreover, each proposal has an associated _voting period_, which determines the period of time over which votes for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, each proposal has an associated **voting period**, which determines the period of time over which votes for
```

 this proposal are accepted.

### How to submit a proposal

> To submit a proposal, it is easiest to have a neuron that can be controlled on a command line tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To submit a proposal, it is recommended to use a neuron that can be controlled with a command line tool.
```

> You can find concrete instructions how to submit a proposal of type `Motion` [here](https://wiki.internetcomputer.org/wiki/How-To:_Create_an_NNS_motion_proposal).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you can review concrete instructions how to [submit a proposal of type `Motion`](https://wiki.internetcomputer.org/wiki/How-To:_Create_an_NNS_motion_proposal).
```

## Proposal decision and wait-for-quiet
After a proposal is submitted and added to the governance canister, other users who control neurons can [vote on the proposal](./proposal-voting.mdx).

> The governance canister stores a neuron's choice in the still empty ballot where the neuron's voting power is already recorded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The governance canister stores a neuron's choice in the empty ballot where the neuron's voting power has been recorded.
```

In this way, the proposal always contains the information of the total voting power of "Yes" and "No" votes.

> A proposal can be _decided_ in two ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A proposal can be decided in two ways:
```

> 1. **Absolute Majority before the voting period ends**: At any point, even before the voting period ends, if an absolute
> majority (more than half of the total voting power stored in the proposal) has voted Yes, then the proposal is adopted and if
>  an absolute majority has voted No, then the proposal is rejected.
> 2. **Simple Majority at the voting period’s end**: When the voting period ends, if a simple majority (more than half of the
> cast votes) has voted Yes and the number of these Yes-votes constitute at least 3% of the total voting power, then the
> proposal is adopted. Otherwise, the proposal is rejected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Absolute majority before the voting period ends**: At any point, even before the voting period ends, if an absolute majority (more than half of the total voting power stored in the proposal) has voted "Yes", then the proposal is adopted, and if an absolute majority has voted "No", then the proposal is rejected.
2. **Simple majority at the voting period’s end**: When the voting period ends, if a simple majority (more than half of the cast votes) has voted "Yes" and the number of these "Yes"-votes constitute at least 3% of the total voting power, then the proposal is adopted. Otherwise, the proposal is rejected.
```

> What also plays into this is an algorithm called _wait-for-quiet_ that dynamically adjusts the deadline.
> The idea of wait-for-quiet is to decide proposals quickly when all voters agree, but increase the time that neurons
> can vote for proposals that are controversial. That means that the voting period can be dynamically increased, depending
> on the neurons’ votes. In particular, each time a proposal’s outcome is turned (either a Yes-majority is turned to a
> No-majority or vice versa), the proposal’s deadline is increased. Currently, a proposal's initial voting period is 4 days
> and can be increased by at most another 4 days. That is, the voting period that is taken into account for the above rules
> can be between 4 and 8 days, depending on the voting activity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What also plays into this is an algorithm called **wait-for-quiet** that dynamically adjusts the deadline. The idea of wait-for-quiet is to decide proposals quickly when all voters agree, but increase the time that neurons can vote for proposals that are controversial. That means that the voting period can be dynamically increased, depending
on the neurons’ votes. In particular, each time a proposal’s outcome is turned (either a "Yes"-majority is turned to a
"No"-majority or vice versa), the proposal’s deadline is increased. Currently, a proposal's initial voting period is 4 days and can be increased by at most another 4 days. That is, the voting period that is taken into account for the above rules can be between 4 and 8 days, depending on the voting activity.
```

## Proposal execution

> Technically, a proposal defines a method on a canister that will be called if the proposal is adopted with some parameters
> (see [here](./proposal-advanced.mdx) for details).
> When a proposal is adopted, the defined method on the specified canister is automatically called with the given parameters.
> This is done fully automatically by the governance canister and does not require any manual intervention.
> A proposal's execution may be successful, in which case the proposal is labeled as `executed` or it may fail, in which case
> the proposal is labeled as `failed`.
> When a proposal is rejected, most of the time nothing happens (in very few cases some cleanup work is initiated).
> Therefore, `rejected` is also a possible final proposal state.
> 
> :::info
> A proposal is adopted or rejected as soon as a decision can be made, which might be before the voting deadline.
> To ensure that neurons can still take their time to vote and get rewards, neurons that vote after the proposals' decision but
> before the voting period's deadline still get rewards.
> See [this page](./staking-voting-rewards.mdx) for more information on rewards.
> 
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Technically, a proposal defines a method on a canister that will be called if the proposal is adopted with [some parameters](./proposal-advanced.mdx).

When a proposal is adopted, the defined method on the specified canister is automatically called with the given parameters. This is done automatically by the governance canister and does not require any manual intervention.
A proposal's execution may be successful, in which case the proposal is labeled as `executed`, or it may fail, in which case the proposal is labeled as `failed`.

When a proposal is rejected, most of the time nothing happens. In very few cases some cleanup work is initiated.
Therefore, `rejected` is also a possible final proposal state.

:::info
A proposal is adopted or rejected as soon as a decision can be made, which might be before the voting deadline.
To ensure that neurons can still take their time to vote and get rewards, neurons that vote after the proposals' decision but before the voting period's deadline still get rewards.
See [staking and voting rewards](./staking-voting-rewards.mdx) for more information on rewards.
:::
```
